the Babbage Difference Engine was an example of mechanical iteration where you make a motor or a crank or something to do something one of the earliest most powerful mechanical computers ever built was called the Bamba and it was used to
crack encrypted communications in World War II with Germans and Japanese that used a device called
the Enigma to encrypt these messages and send them using Morse code and radio. And the Bomba was a
British, Polish device that repeatedly tried to guess these settings for a day, like guessing a
password based only on the encrypted text. And so when you listen to a Bomba moving, it is lots of
clicking, lots of spinning, and lots of rotation because the iteration is kind of rotation.
So we think of a for-loop as iteration, but in a physical computer a for-loop is often rotation.
Another device that kind of approximates this same kind of computation with a little less high end
is a pinball machine. So the Bomba was a very fast electromechanical computer in the 30s and the 40s.
The pinball machine is kind of like the 50s and the 60s, and it's just a kind of a good example of
how state-of-the-art military technology becomes games later. Because a pinball machine uses
switches and relays and physical storage like piles of balls to track a score, award free games,
and count the number of balls, start the game, stop the games, take your money, and give you credits.
And these are all built by using relays and wiring and knowing things like the response time of a
relay when it's switching from sort of off to on, and then relay feedback that once the relay goes
to on it stays on. And in many ways it's a throwback to the kind of technology that the
electromechanical computational technology is similar to the Bomba. But the problem is that
the pure mechanical computations were just too slow. And if you take a machine like the Babbage
engine and you just make it go up 20 times faster, it's gonna fall apart in like less than a minute.
Might take you years to build, you go too fast in it, and all the pieces come flying off.
And that's because the the energy to change the state, right, so changing state, again going back
to this, the changing of the state is me pushing on the thumb thing. But if I all of a sudden made
a really fast engine that would push this thing a thousand times a second, it would probably break.
It couldn't take the stress. And so the problem is is that physical and electromechanical computing
had just a limit of, there's like inertia, you know, physical problems like inertia. And so you
can, you have to limit the speed of like the difference engine, so you don't, or the Bomba,
so you don't just physically damage the machine. If you go to the maximum speed and double it,
you will break the machine very, very quickly. So what happened was is instead of storing data and
storing the zero or the one in something mechanical like a relay, they started using, again in World
War II at Bletchley Park, electronic switching using tubes. Now tubes are interesting devices.
They are, generally have a vacuum in them. And let me show you, let me show you this a little
bit more close up. So here's a tube, okay. And this is a vac, this is glass. It has a vacuum in it.
And there are little plates in this tube that are heated up and glow, and electrons flow between the
plates. There's a base and an emitter, and then a grid that speeds or slows up the electrons.
And, you know, there's electric, electric is sent in. Sometimes it's heating, sometimes it's sort of
just a positive or negative. Sometimes it's to control it. Now the original idea of tubes
was to take sound waves from, say, a microphone and amplify them to be louder to go to a speaker.
And so tubes are analog and continuous amplifiers, meaning whatever you put in,
whatever signal you put in, could be a sort of a flat signal or a moving signal,
it's going to come out louder, increased. What happens is they can do some feedback in these
tubes and sort of tune them in such a way that you can have a certain level of voltage,
that is the zero, and a certain level of voltage is the one. And then with a little feedback,
you can make the zero and the one sticky. And so it takes power, and they generate heat, but they
have no moving parts, so they can switch way faster than any kind of a physical storage device.
So one of the first tube-based electronic computers was called the Colossus, also at
Bletchley Park, currently at the National Museum of Computing History at Bletchley Park. But it could
do the other computations way faster than the other electro-mechanical computer called the Bomba.
But they're they're pretty hot. If you stand by this thing, you can feel heat coming off of it.
Power consumption and heat dissipation for tube-based computers, even though they're much faster,
are still a challenge. This is an electronic computer, the world's first computer for many
years because of the secrecy. And you can assume that the American ENIAC computer was the world's
first computer, very check. In fact, that computer was there from this colleague of mine. This
computer predated it by three years, but nobody knew that. So this man who designed and built the
world's first electronic computer went back to Donald Trump, and no one ever heard of him. He's
carried on designing telephoto exchanges, which was a real tragedy indeed. Now many years later,
just walking by, very kindly, I'd always wanted to build one of these things. But how do you build
something if there are no records? Well, not quite. How many flowers were put alive? And he
offered to help. There were still 89 black and white setographs. I managed to find some of the
engineers who were still alive. I was surprised to find so he had kept notebooks. That second
fragment up there had been kept. So he managed to get them all together in a, in a modern
computer design package. They redesigned across the floor too from the ground up. Having redesigned
it, I hope I'm not making any mistakes. Having designed across it from the ground up, of course,
they had to build it. Now this gentleman was clevered up. They, like with the telephone
exchanges, were de-commissioning all their own exchanges. They took a lorry, went to the back
door and said, "I'll get rid of all that old crap for free." And for free acquired the stock of
valves. I believe they started with the metalwork, the ground up, but a mere 14 years, 15 years of
it. 16 years. 16 years I had a working machine. But to prove this is a rebuild, this is not a
model or a simulation, you need to make it with what it was designed to do, work out the break
for Lorenz type of machine. Now we had a General Lorenz machine. They were capturing at the end
of the war by the Gilmarch al-Pesarin, from Gilmarch al-Pesarin. The machine would send to
the Heinz-Dittsdorf competing museum in Germany. It generated a test message, intercepted here,
put a bunch of tape, put the tape on the machine, three and a half hours later it would be a
decrypted finessus. Okay.
Now, going back to programming, a big subplot in the Hidden Figures movie is the transition
from doing complex calculations manually by humans in a room with adding machines to doing
them by writing Fortran programs on IBM 7090. This was NASA. Now the interesting thing is
there's such a natural parallel to writing Fortran instructions, to following some written
instructions by doing all the calculations. And it was very natural for these people who
had years of experience following instructions precisely to then start writing Fortran code
that the computer would follow. And so being a human computer was a natural training ground
for the emerging programming field. The basic idea of this first phase is kind of fun. We
have built endless physical devices over time to help us better understand our world. Things like
the passage of time, things like the solar systems, stars in the night sky, things like how fast you
can go through air, whether it's a boat or an airplane. We've always been interested in money.
Things like curved motion under the effect of gravity, spacecraft, like in the movie Hidden
Figures. There was a lot of calculations that happened. And by the way, the IBM 7090 in Hidden
Figures was built using transistors, solid state electronics that greatly reduced heat and power
consumption and increased speed. And they could do basically 24,000 multiplications per second.
So in upcoming lectures, we're going to start exploring how we go from relays and motors
to solid state computation.